Submission of 1749_Cloud-Native_Standards_Checklist.md (#1903)
cncf/toc: initiatives/1749_Cloud-Native_Standards_Checklist.md

> # Kubernetes Agentic Standards

Reviewer: Cloud Native Agentic?

Author: Agree that the naming needs improvement to avoid confusion - but I would expect that this would take place during the proper publishing of the document. The current markdown version is just a precursor to a final version.

This paper aligns to the definition of Containerization of Agentic AI as: 

***A microservice based application which can consist of one or more containers. Performing standalone or collaborative (distributed) function through the interaction with at least one entity (container) or quorum, accessing AI or Machine Learning capabilities. To perform tasks based upon the reasoning and execution of actions within event based systems triggered or reacted upon via signals. Key attributes include the ability to perform system and/or user tasks autonomously, in conjunction with the ability to plan and control the continuation of execution or completion”***

> Overview

Reviewer: Is this a header?

Author: Typo - it should just be bold - as its a starting definition

Within the Cloud Native space, there has been an explosion in Agentic AI. Rapid prototyping and adoption in the field have taken place with the promise for businesses to accelerate time to value for products and services for organizations across all sectors and technology verticals. While this interest is very promising for this burgeoning field, challenges exist in terms of standardization and interoperability, which are currently lacking in this domain. 

Agentic systems provide the means to perform multi-hop reasoning, and subsequent action calling based upon signals to augment and provide dynamism to conventional programming sequences.  

> This paper explores six key areas which are associated with components that are in need of standardization to ensure interoperability, security, and observability are applied from the beginning. The focus of this document is not on how a particular agentic protocol itself is programmed, which language is used or its speed or efficiency of execution, but rather an agnostic view of what should be considered as the best practices to apply as to ensure that deployments in this space can securely scale and remain explainable, through a common and effective foundation. 

Reviewer: What's the six key areas?

Author: Good catch Paco - we consolidated after the document began, we have 4 key areas now, I updated the document.

Control Communications
Observability
Governance
Security

## General best practices for containers:

The containerization principles outlined herein include emerging definitions of agentic microservices (e.g., autonomous, signal-driven, reasoning-capable container systems), the recommendations in this general section are not specific to agentic use cases and apply to any containerized environment.

General best practices include: **Security**, which covers minimizing attack surface and safeguarding container integrity; **Observability**, which focuses on collecting actionable metrics, logs, and traces to understand system behavior; and **Availability & Fault Tolerance**, which outlines strategies for maintaining service continuity and resilience under failure conditions.

> **Security**

Reviewer 2: could we highlight what is unique to AI agents so it is clear to the reader?  It could even be helpful to explain why these are unique.

Author: Discussed to item with Nina - its a good call out, as we agree this could be confusing. Essentially we aim at having the general section setting the stage in terms of standard best practices, as a precursor to the agent specific sections. We will update the section to make a clearer transition between sections.

- [ ] Package only what is needed, use multi-stage builds to minimize image size, and avoid leaking build tools, credentials, or secrets.  
- [ ] Use secure container images from official, trusted repositories, scanning images for vulnerabilities regularly. Sign and verify images to ensure the integrity and provenance of container images. Add OCI-compliant annotations to container images to document metadata such as source, version, authorship, scan status, and signature information.  
- [ ] Follow secret management best practices. Never bake secrets into container images. Use Kubernetes Secrets or integrate with secret managers.  
- [ ] Run containers as non-root users. Define a non-root user in the Dockerfile and configure the runtime to use it. This limits the blast radius in case of a security breach.  
- [ ] Continuously monitor and update base images of the container to include the latest security patches and avoid known vulnerabilities. Use distroless images where possible.  
- [ ] Log and monitor container activity. Monitor runtime behavior, resource usage, filesystem access, network activity, and system calls to detect anomalies or security incidents early.

> **Observability**

Author: Update added to last commit

- [ ] Use a standard observability stack (MELT). Consolidating metrics, logs, and traces to ensure viable explainability and achievable debugability of the system.   
- [ ] Incorporate network observability by collecting flow logs for security, performance monitoring, and troubleshooting.  
- [ ] Monitor resource-specific metrics  

>       - [ ] Disk Usage: Monitor disk usage on nodes and persistent volumes to prevent outages caused by storage exhaustion.  

Reviewer: The preview shows no checkbox with `      `. Similarly, below and other blocks below. 
```suggestion
    - [ ] Disk Usage: Monitor disk usage on nodes and persistent volumes to prevent outages caused by storage exhaustion.  
```

      - [ ] Monitor control plane and node health in the cluster.  
- [ ] Instrument workloads with relevant metrics and expose application-level and business-critical metrics in addition to system-level metrics.  
- [ ] Set up alerting based on SLOs/SLA thresholds.  
- [ ] Implement cost observability to support GPU and LLM benchmarking.  
- [ ] Secure observability pipelines to avoid tampering with audit trails from agents.   
- [ ] Set up data retention and aggregation policies.   
      

**Availability & Fault Tolerance**

- [ ] Implement resource limits and requests to prevent noisy neighbor issues and ensure container stability. Set reasonable CPU/GPU and memory boundaries in your Kubernetes pod specs.  
- [ ] Utilize PodDisruptionBudgets to enforce minimum pod availability during voluntary disruptions like upgrades or node drains.  
- [ ] Use Pod Anti‑Affinity or Topology Spread Constraints to distribute pod replicas across nodes or zones, minimizing the impact of node or zone-level failures when possible.  
- [ ] Use Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA) to scale workloads dynamically using CPU, Memory, or custom metrics such as request volume.  

> - [ ] Inference extensions provided via the Gateway API ensure that path-based rules are to be applied with a focus on inference served AI Models. This capability supports more dynamic deployment scenarios used by agents.

Author: We will call this out more specifically - being a more general best practice, and not necessarily applicable to all scenarios such as the ones which you rightly noted.

> ![][image1]

Reviewer 3: Yeah - I think this is an issue with different markdown renderers. Right now in its current form the images will not be viewable on github. It might work if done directly as html instead of markdown link.

- The CNCF [white paper](https://github.com/cncf/tag-security/blob/main/community/resources/security-whitepaper/v2/CNCF_cloud-native-security-whitepaper-May2022-v2.pdf) on cloud native security defines security controls and practices that are appropriate to the develop, distribute, deploy, and runtime phases.   
- Learn more about Kubernetes pod security standards: [https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-standards/](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-standards/)   
- Learn more about Linux kernel security constraints in the context of hardening pods and containers:  [https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/linux-kernel-security-constraints/](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/linux-kernel-security-constraints/)   
- You can learn more about tools for monitoring resources here: [https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/debug/debug-cluster/resource-usage-monitoring/](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/debug/debug-cluster/resource-usage-monitoring/)  

# Control and Communication 

> Microservice architectures have long followed the principles and practices of information hiding, minimal endpoint exposure for only the requisite and needed services, and clear contract-based communications. These same principles should be followed in the context of Agentic architectures. As multi-agent systems grow, the intricacy of ensuring effective coordination and communication rises significantly. While Kubernetes provides the platform, the complexities of inter-agent communication protocols (like MCP, A2A, ACP) and managing "tool sprawl issues" require specific attention within the agent application layer itself. 

Reviewer 2: isn't ACP being merged to A2A?

Reviewer 2: worth highlight secure communication become way more important as unpredictable nature of ai agents.

Author: Updated in last commit

- [ ] **Agents to Other Agents**  
      - [ ] Protocols like Google’s A2A (described below) aim to enable secure, dynamic, and structured peer-to-peer agent interaction, even across heterogeneous agent ecosystems.  
- [ ] **Filtering and input/output schema validation**   
      - [ ] Given the unpredictable nature of generative AI, defining schemas using JSON Schema, Protobuf, or OpenAPI to validate payloads during tool calls and external service invocations can increase system predictability and avoid cascading failures. Data constraints can be enforced to avoid malformed input, malicious content injection, or drift caused by inconsistent formats.

- [ ] **Protocols today (MCP,  A2A, etc…)**   

>       While there is a broad array of competing technologies in the industry today, numerous protocols have gained a level of interest for preliminary evaluation in the field in the domain of Agentic AI. Each of these protocols aims at addressing a specific problem space within the domain, ranging from tool exposure to inter-framework communications or agent discovery, trust and identification services.  

Author: Reworded in last commit

      - [ ] MCP from Anthropic: Provides a key focus on “tool exposure” providing a means to define an “MCP Server” which is responsible for providing tool access to an “MCP Client”, in many scenarios the use of MCP can support both single and multi-agent frameworks in achieving standardized access to specific tooling, without the need to define and program the logic from scratch. Considerations should be taken in terms of only applying narrowly scoped MCP server tooling access for the given tools required, for both security and optimal system performance reasons.   

>       - [ ] A2A from Google: Offers a means for agents to communicate with one another directly, analogous to peer-to-peer communications. Providing an optimal means for agents which may even exist in disparate domains or that utilize disparate frameworks, with the means to establish communications with one another. A2A utilizes JSON-RPC 2.0 over HTTPS and Server-Sent Events (SSE).   

Reviewer 2: Aren't MCP also use json-rpc and supports SSE?  Felt odd it is only mentioned in A2A

Author: Correct - will update

Author: Updated in last commit

>       - [ ] Identity: The Agntcy identity framework (recently donated to the Linux Foundation) takes the approach of allowing varied identity providers to be used in a BYOI (Bring Your Own Identity) construct. What is notably different with this approach for identity is that it also supports the Web3 DID based standard, which supports distributed identity concepts. A novel approach towards the deployment of Identity within Agent-based architectures. 

Author: We will introduce it in the communications section for completeness, mentioning its usefulness around workload security and federation, indicating that it is covered in more detail in the security section.

The target audience for this paper are individuals who aim to deploy agentic tooling in Cloud Native, microservice-based environments who are looking for a central and concise view of important points to consider in order to build a successful system deployment. 

This document provides a foundational checklist for agentic standards, but is not intended to be exhaustive and will continue to evolve as practices and the tools improve.

# General 

This section outlines foundational container and observability best practices for Cloud Native workloads, including Agentic AI systems. Evolving challenges include the rapid advancement of agent environments and capabilities, which require governance frameworks to adapt continuously. Future research and standardization efforts should focus on nuanced reward functions, layered reasoning architectures with built-in controls, and robust safety and alignment techniques to manage increasingly capable and autonomous systems.

## General best practices for containers:

> The containerization principles outlined herein include emerging definitions of agentic microservices (e.g., autonomous, signal-driven, reasoning-capable container systems), the recommendations in this general section are not specific to agentic use cases and apply to any containerized environment.

Reviewer 4: > agentic microservices

some thoughts here:

the document assumed that AI agents in multi-agent system will employ microservices based architecture.

but AI agents can also run as serverless application, not mandatory have to run as microservices, and serverless is also one of practices in cloud native definition: https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/main/DEFINITION.md

microservices mostly means long-running services. For AI agent, the large portion of time is in the phase of inference executed in XPU, from handreds milliseconds to seconds, and one task executed by AI agent may include many times inference executions. compared to the time spent in the inference phases, the time to start AI agent(start container with image pulling or not, or just instantiate AI agent from remote database) will become negligible especially when the image is mostly cached in the host. Thus, AI agent running in serverless mode is quite common.

whether the serveless based AI agent system also be covered in the checklist

- [ ] Set up alerting based on SLOs/SLA thresholds.  
- [ ] Implement cost observability to support GPU and LLM benchmarking.  
- [ ] Secure observability pipelines to avoid tampering with audit trails from agents.   
- [ ] Set up data retention and aggregation policies.   
      

**Availability & Fault Tolerance**

- [ ] Implement resource limits and requests to prevent noisy neighbor issues and ensure container stability. Set reasonable CPU/GPU and memory boundaries in your Kubernetes pod specs.  
- [ ] Utilize PodDisruptionBudgets to enforce minimum pod availability during voluntary disruptions like upgrades or node drains.  
- [ ] Use Pod Anti‑Affinity or Topology Spread Constraints to distribute pod replicas across nodes or zones, minimizing the impact of node or zone-level failures when possible.  
- [ ] Use Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA) to scale workloads dynamically using CPU, Memory, or custom metrics such as request volume.  
- [ ] Inference extensions provided via the Gateway API ensure that path-based rules are to be applied with a focus on inference served AI Models. This capability supports more dynamic deployment scenarios used by agents.

> NOTE: The above items are general in nature, and while applicable to smart load-balancing to inference models, does not pertain to more comprehensive MCP / Agent to Agent or LLM tooling. 

Reviewer 5: There should be a separate networking section

- [ ] **Agents to Other Agents**  
      - [ ] Protocols like Google’s A2A (described below) aim to enable secure, dynamic, and structured peer-to-peer agent interaction, even across heterogeneous agent ecosystems.  
- [ ] **Filtering and input/output schema validation**   
      - [ ] Given the unpredictable nature of generative AI, defining schemas using JSON Schema, Protobuf, or OpenAPI to validate payloads during tool calls and external service invocations can increase system predictability and avoid cascading failures. Data constraints can be enforced to avoid malformed input, malicious content injection, or drift caused by inconsistent formats.

- [ ] **Protocols today (MCP,  A2A, etc…)**   
      While there is a broad array of complimentary technologies in the industry today, numerous protocols have gained a level of interest for preliminary evaluation in the field in the domain of Agentic AI. Each of these protocols aims at addressing a specific problem space within the domain, ranging from tool exposure to inter-framework communications or agent discovery, trust and identification services.  

>       - [ ] MCP from Anthropic: Provides a key focus on “tool exposure” providing a means to define an “MCP Server” which is responsible for providing tool access to an “MCP Client”, in many scenarios the use of MCP can support both single and multi-agent frameworks in achieving standardized access to specific tooling, without the need to define and program the logic from scratch. Considerations should be taken in terms of only applying narrowly scoped MCP server tooling access for the given tools required, for both security and optimal system performance reasons. MCP utilizes JSON-RPC 2.0 over HTTPS and Server-Sent Events (SSE).

Reviewer 5: Server-Sent Events  is an older version protocol

      - [ ] Identity: The Agntcy identity framework (recently donated to the Linux Foundation) takes the approach of allowing varied identity providers to be used in a BYOI (Bring Your Own Identity) construct. What is notably different with this approach for identity is that it also supports the Web3 DID based standard, which supports distributed identity concepts. A novel approach towards the deployment of Identity within Agent-based architectures.
      - [ ] SPIFFE/SPIRE: Focused towards workload security, this technology stack provides a means to secure cryptographic identity of worksloads through the use of SVIDs in the form of JWT or X.509 documents. The solution allows for workload attestation and federation. (This technology is covered more comprehensively in the security section) 

- [ ] **Message and Communication Design Considerations with REST, GRPC & Kafka**   

>       - [ ] To accommodate the data, the usage of known event-driven bus architectures such as Kafka and Flink should be considered. Event buses are especially useful when asynchronous communication is desired (e.g. long-running tasks) or when building an event-driven architecture (e.g. emitting telemetry, decision logs, or coordination signals). Kafka guarantees high reliability and delivery guarantees, useful for data de-duplication in data management pipelines (at-least-once delivery), and Flink may be considered for stream processing use-cases to manipulate data in transit.  

Author: We have updated the section to map more specifically to agent behaviour.

## Communication Related Attributes

The list below provides a non-exhaustive overview of communication-related attributes that should be considered when creating Agent-to-X deployments (where “X” may refer to tools, services, models, or other agents). 

It should be noted, that for this section, the **change revision is very high**, this is largely due to numerous protocol specifications that are yet to be formally adopted and standardized in the field. 

- [ ] **Orchestration Flow, Safety, and Fault-Tolerance**  
      - [ ] Design and implement orchestration methodologies using GitOps principles that optimize agent workflows, task assignments, and communication patterns. This should consider various architectural patterns (e.g., centralized, decentralized, star, ring) and their implications including safety and fault-tolerance aspects for the **security and control** of the solution. 

      

- [ ] **Tools & Services**  

>       - [ ] A common approach is pursued to access tools (MCP, A2A, ACP, etc…). Unnecessary entropy **can lead to complexity** in the ability to operate and monitor the solution effectively. While the correct tool should be considered for the task required, careful consideration should be given to whether variance in the system/solution is necessary.   

Reviewer 4: how about add skills here. currently some tools access will be done by scripts / cli under skill. for example, the popular moltbot(clawdbot) skills, and cluade skills https://github.com/anthropics/skills/tree/main/skills

Author: @ChaoyiHuang We added a reference to the skills in the footnotes for the section, further explanation below in the response to Lin.

> # Cloud Native Agentic Standards

Reviewer 4: A 'Standard' implies a prescriptive and mandatory requirement where compliance is strictly enforced. Since the items in this checklist are primarily best practices, perhaps 'Guidelines' would be a more accurate term? （considering that the AI Agent field is still rapidly evolving and has yet to reach a stable implementation paradigm）

This paper aligns to the definition of Containerization of Agentic AI as: 

> **A microservice based application which can consist of one or more containers based upon defined system architectual requirements. Performing standalone or collaborative (distributed) function through the interaction with at least one entity (container) or quorum, accessing AI or Machine Learning capabilities. To perform tasks based upon the reasoning and execution of actions within event based systems triggered or reacted upon via signals. Key attributes include the ability to perform system and/or user tasks autonomously, in conjunction with the ability to plan and control the continuation of execution or completion”**

Reviewer 6: Since this is a definition, i am being a bit picky here to make it more readable, straight forward and from a single author. Please feel free to incorporate or ignore the entire suggestion or parts of it.

```suggestion
**A microservice-based application, composed of one or more containers as dictated by system architecture, that operates either independently or as part of a distributed collaboration—interacting with at least one other entity (container) or achieving quorum-based consensus. It leverages AI or Machine Learning capabilities to reason and execute actions within event-driven systems, where behavior is triggered or modulated by signals. Its defining attributes: full autonomy in executing system or user tasks, coupled with the ability to plan, orchestrate, and govern the continuation or completion of its own execution.**
```

> **A microservice-based application, composed of one or more containers as dictated by system architecture, that operates either independently or as part of a distributed collaboration—interacting with at least one other entity (container) or achieving quorum-based consensus. It leverages AI or Machine Learning capabilities to reason and execute actions within event-driven systems, where behavior is triggered or modulated by signals. Its defining attributes: encompass differing levels of autonomy in executing system or user tasks, coupled with the ability to plan, orchestrate, and govern the continuation or completion of its own execution.**

Reviewer 7: > A microservice-based application

This reminds me that the agentic system is based on microservice, which is usually request-response pattern, scaling based on requests etc., however, agentic system is quite different as mentioned after, will this leads to misunderstanding of the system. And microservice is by default described as a distribution system, but agent maybe not? Or we're here only talking about distributed agentic systems since we're running on Kubernetes.

- [ ] **Message and Communication Design Considerations with REST, GRPC & Kafka**   
      - [ ] To accommodate the data, the usage of known event-driven bus architectures such as Kafka and Flink should be considered. Event buses are especially useful when asynchronous communication is desired (e.g. long-running tasks) or when building an event-driven architecture (e.g. emitting telemetry, decision logs, or coordination signals). Kafka guarantees high reliability and delivery guarantees, useful for data de-duplication in data management pipelines (at-least-once delivery), and Flink may be considered for stream processing use-cases to manipulate data in transit. While these are very common system architecture patterns, the handling of this data, and its resepctive security, needs careful consideration when being utilized by agent based systems.

>       - [ ] gRPC, the rate of data at input for streaming data should be considered carefully to assess whether a ELT or ETL approach needs to be taken. Other considerations around the impact that the amount of streaming data may have on agent token limits when interfacing with an models are worthy of evaluation.   

Reviewer 7: Has the same problem with display.

            

Critical steps and methodologies required *before* an agent is deployed to ensure its fitness for purpose, including adherence to defined policies and robustness against known failure modes, should be considered for production deployments. 

Evaluation factors should be considered beyond the siloed metrics of task completion accuracy or job completion time, to consider multifaceted attributes as part of a comprehensive assessment. 

- [ ] **Assessment Criterion**   
      - [ ] Clear definition of success criterion and success rate of execution in conjunction with quality evaluation of outputs  
      - [ ] Total cost of usage  
            - [ ] Computational Cost (Processing time, Memory Usage)  
            - [ ] Tangible Financial Costs (API Calls, Tokens Used)   
            - [ ] Environmental Impact (CO2, Carbon Credits)  
            - [ ] Human Cost (Oversight / Setup Time)   
            - [ ] Mandatory storage of data (backups, audit trails)   

>       - [ ] **Targeted Use Case Evaluation**  

Reviewer 7: Why highlight Targeted Use Case Evaluation here, or it should be parallel to the `Assessment Criterion`.

- [ ] **Integrated Lifecycle Governance**  
      - [ ] Reiterate that effective governance for Kubernetes based agentic applications is not a one-time exercise but an ongoing, integrated process across the entire LLMOps lifecycle. It requires a symbiotic relationship between technical implementation, policy frameworks, and continuous oversight.

Footnotes:  
[https://arxiv.org/pdf/2407.14981](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2407.14981)

# Security

This section defines the security considerations involved in building agentic systems. Three primary goals should guide the design: authentication, authorization, and trust. Agents and their components must be able to securely authenticate and should only be granted the minimum permissions necessary to function. Trust boundaries must be clearly established to prevent privilege escalation, data leakage, or unauthorized behavior within the system.

> Keeping these goals in mind user access, agent identity, tenancy, and data access must be deliberately designed and enforced. Each agent should have a unique, verifiable identity to support traceability, accountability, and secure communication across system boundaries. Strong tenancy isolation is critical, especially in multi-tenant environments, to prevent cross-agent interference and ensure that agents operate within their own scoped contexts. Finally, access to data must be controlled by explicit policies that define which data an agent can access, under what conditions, and for how long.

Author: There is a complete section for agent tenancy which points to RBAC and other concepts in the context of agents. What is not included, is topics around confidential computing would would align more to the compute and physical deployment aspects of ring-fencing deployments. For more elaborate explanations around model security and tenancy, there is a pending security whitepaper under review by the TOC which we consider as a the definitive source of truth.
